In this video, let's create a special type
of middleware called param middleware.
So param middleware is middleware that only runs
for certain parameters, so basically,
when we have a certain parameter in our URL.
Now in our example here, the only parameter
that we might have in our route URL is the id, right?
And so we can write middleware that only runs
when this id is present in the URL,
okay, so let me show you how to do it.
It is quite simple actually, so it's on our router
and then the param method, okay.
And so here we specify first the parameter
that we actually want to search for,
so basically the parameter for which
this middleware is gonna run, and it's called id,
and then of course our actual middleware function.
And as usual, we have access to the request
and to the response object, and then
senses a middleware function also
to the next function, right?
Now in a param middleware function,
we actually get access to a fourth argument
and that one is the value of the parameter in question.
So we usually call that one val, which stands for value.
And so now we can go ahead and simply log it
to the console, just to take a look
if this actually works, so let's say Tour id is
and then id, right?
Next up, we also have to call next, right?
Because otherwise the request response cycle
will get stuck in this middleware function
and it's not gonna be able to move on
to the next middleware in the stack, right?
Which are gonna be these routes down here.
All right, so let's give it a save and check it out now.
And we want it to not for get all users
but for get one Tour, right?
Well let me show you first what happens
if we do not have any id, okay, and so now,
we don't see any log down in our console.
But if I now sent the same request on this route
where we have the id, let's see what happens then.
Oh, it tells me that id is not defined,
and indeed it's not id, so that was a stupid mistake.
So it is val for value, right?
So remember how I said that this value parameter
is the one that will actually hold
the value of the id parameter, and so of course
that's the one that we need to then use here
in order to get access to that id.
So let's try that again, and now indeed
we have Tour id is two, right?
So that log came right from this function here.
Now, what I also want to show you is that
this middleware function is not going to
run for any of the user routes.
So let's say we call a user with a specific id,
so let's go ahead and copy this one here,
create a new request with an id,
and let me actually save it also.
So get user and save to user, and when I send it here
we of course get our standard response of
this route is not defined, but you also see
that we have no log like we had before.
And so that is of course because this middleware function
is only specified in our tour router.
So in this kind of local mini application,
so again, that is the analogy that I like to make.
So basically that each router is
kind of a mini sub-application, one for each resource.
And so since this middleware is only specified
on this router, well then of course,
it is only part of the middleware stack
if we are actually inside of this sub-application.
Makes sense?
So let's suppose we have an incoming request on tours/id.
So that request will then go through all these middleware,
so first this middleware, then this one,
then this middleware, then this one,
so all of these are part of the middleware stack
and then it will finally hit this middleware
and since this is actually the route,
it will then get into tourRouter middleware.
Okay, and so from there it then goes right into
this middleware, and so then this code will be run.
And again, that's only because it has an id in the route.
If not, well, then this would simply be ignored
and it would move on right to the next middleware
in the stack, so these down here, right?
Cool, so that is how param middleware works;
but for now it is not really that useful.
But we can actually use it for
a very practical use case here.
So let's go to our handler functions here
and you see that in all of the handler functions
that actually use the id, we check if the id is valid.
So we do it here in get tour, and we also do it
in update tour, so here, and in delete tour.
So all these three functions have this very similar code
where they check if the id is valid
and if not, they send back this Invalid ID response.
So we have all this code in the same place
and as you already know, it is not a good practice
to repeat code and so what we can do here
is to use the concept of param middleware;
and perform this check here in an outside middleware
that it's gonna run before the request
even hits these handler functions.
So let's go ahead and copy or actually cut
the code from here and create a new middleware function
called checkID, and of course I also need to export that.
So checkID and we have access, request, response,
next, and again, keep in mind that
it is a param middleware and so the fourth argument
will be the value of the parameter.
Okay, paste it here, and then don't forget
to call next at the end of the middleware, all right?
And what's also very important is that
we have this return statement here,
because if we didn't have this return here,
well, then express would send this response back
but it would still continue running
the code in this function.
And so after sending the response,
it will then still hit this next function
and it would move on to the next middleware
and will then send another response to the client.
But that is really not allowed,
so remember that we actually run into this error before,
where it told us that we were not allowed
to send headers after the response had already been sent.
And so that's the kind of error
that we would run into if we didn't
have this return statement, okay.
So again, just make sure that after sending this response,
the function will return so that it will finish
and it will never call this next.
So never forget that, but of course
we're gonna do this multiple times
throughout the rest of the course
and so you will get used to this kind of pattern.
So let's go ahead and remove this repeated code
from all of these other functions
so here we have it again, and yeah.
I also want this code here just to make sure
that the function's actually running,
and okay, so now we can get rid of this here
and replace it with our newly created controller function.
So tourController, checkID,
so let's check that out now,
and well again, just to make sure
that it doesn't run where we
do not have an id, so we have no log here,
so everything is still working on that side.
And now get tour with a regular id,
so a valid id, and so let's see.
Well, we get the Tour id is log,
and so that means if it did actually run
our checkID middleware, right?
And if we now try an invalid id,
well then we get our Invalid ID message,
the 404 error code, and of course our tour id.
Let's do the same with the patch,
we already have an invalid ID here
and so it also runs on this one.
So, perfect, right?
So we no longer have the checkID code
in the update handler that we just invoked basically,
but still our ID is checked because
we have that middleware, so this here.
We have that middleware in the stack
before it actually hits the update tourController.
So this middleware is now part of our pipeline
as you can imagine it, now you might argue
that we might simply create a simple function
which could also check for the ID
and I call that function inside of
each of these tour function, and then call it inside
each of these relevant tour controllers;
but that would really go against
the philosophy of express, where we should always work
with the middleware stack, so with this pipeline
as much as we can, okay, and so these functions here,
they do not have to worry at all about validation.
Each of these functions has only one purpose
which is to do what they say,
so this one just gets the tour,
this one just creates a tour, this one just updates,
and this one just deletes, it doesn't check,
it doesn't have to worry about any of that.
And if we would now add another controller here
also depending on the id, well then that would automatically
also check if the id is invalid
without us having to do any additional steps.
So this automatically will check for the id
and so that's really handy and also how
express apps should work, great.
So we have another tool in our express toolbox that
we can now use in order to write our express applications.